<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Sense Atlas (WIP)</title>
    <base href="https://senseatlas.net/f398478e-af15-4890-99ef-58375a73fff2"/>
  </head>
  <body>
    <header>
      <h1><em rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</em> is a tool for <em>understanding</em>.</h1>
      <p property="dct:description"><span about="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> is an <dfn>organizational cartography</dfn> kit. It helps you build <em>maps</em> of projects, policies, and organizational knowledge, to support <dfn>situation awareness</dfn> and <em>comprehension</em> among people working together to achieve common goals. <a href="/#how-to-get-sense-atlas">See how to get access.</a></p>
    </header>
    <main>
      <article>
        <p>You are currently looking at the <q>floor model</q> instance of <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span>. It is a <dfn>work-in-public</dfn>, and mainly features maps pertaining to the development of <span about="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> itself. Not only does this demonstrate what <span about="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService" property="gr:name">Sense Atlas</span> <em>does</em>, it exposes its own development process for all to see.</p>
        <section id="goals-of-sense-atlas">
          <h2>Goals</h2>
          <p>The overarching goal of <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> is to support people at work by providing maps of <dfn>structured information</dfn> related to specific projects, the <dfn>business ecosystem</dfn>, and the surrounding information environment at large.</p>
          <section>
            <h4>Robust and powerful shared information space</h4>
            <p>Great care has been taken to design <a rel="dct:references" href="https://intertwingler.net/" typeof="bibo:Website">the system underlying <span rel="dct:references" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span></a> to <strong>never break a link</strong>. This, in conjunction with a strategy of <dfn>dense hypermedia</dfn>, <span about="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService" property="gr:name">Sense Atlas</span> creates a <em>durable space</em> within an organization where highly <dfn>structured information</dfn> is easy to find, use, and <em>re</em>use.</p>
          </section>
          <section>
            <h4>Documentation without the overhead of documents</h4>
            <p>Simply put, <strong>documents make lousy documentation</strong>. They get misplaced, they go stale, they have poor internal addressability, and frankly, in a business setting, they are often just plain too much to read.</p>
            <p>A linear narrative may be essential for <em>persuasion</em>, but when you've already bought in, just the facts will do. Not <em>just</em> the facts, actually, but facts connected in <em>space</em>, by well-defined <dfn>semantic relations</dfn>. In <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span>, the links do at least <em>some</em> of the talking.</p>
          </section>
          <section>
            <h4>Anti-<dfn>lock-in</dfn> architecture</h4>
            <p><span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> is <dfn>open-source software</dfn> and communicates exclusively using <dfn>open data standards</dfn>. It has been designed so that 100% of its instance data can be exported and <dfn>self-hosted</dfn>, should you choose to do so.</p>
          </section>
          <section>
            <h4><dfn>Machine-actionable</dfn> <em>everything</em></h4>
            <p>Collaborative business software tends to suffer from the <dfn>then-what problem</dfn>: You put all your information in, do some operations, and <em>then what</em>?</p>
            <p>All software has a boundary around its set of capabilities, and if you need something done that the software doesn't do, waiting for the vendor to implement it may not be an option. As such, having access to your data is the first step to repurposing it.</p>
            <p>Access, however, is not enough. Your computer also needs to be able to <em>interpret</em> your data. The <dfn>linked data</dfn> vocabularies <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> uses can be fed directly into a processor and used to drive other systems.</p>
          </section>
        </section>
        <section id="mapping-domains">
          <h2>Domains</h2>
          <p><span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> currently supports mapping the following thematic domains:</p>
          <dl>
            <dt>Concepts</dt>
            <dd>Organizations run much more smoothly when people use the same words to mean the same things. It's doubly important that customers, constituents, and users understand what you mean when you say certain words. The <strong>concept scheme module</strong> is therefore a workspace for structuring taxonomies of concepts and reconciling understandings of terminology.</dd>
            <dt>Issues</dt>
            <dd>An <em>issue</em> is nothing more than a state of affairs in the world that needs something done about it. Software developers have had issue trackers for decades; this is an issue tracker for issues that are bigger than software. The <a rel="ci:mentions" href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Issue-based_information_system"><strong>issue-based information system</strong></a> module is the beating heart of <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span>, and the original module that spurred its development.</dd>
            <dt>Projects</dt>
            <dd>A <em>project</em> can be viewed as <em>graduating</em> a set of issues into <em>goals</em> and their associated <em>tasks</em>, along with concrete <em>targets</em> for completing those tasks. The <strong>project planning</strong> module, which is currently under active development, can be used for conventional resource planning, <em>or</em> for <a rel="ci:mentions" href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fiSjxr8xG6A">a novel value-based methodology</a>.</dd>
          </dl>
          <p>There are several more domains in the pipe and coming in hot:</p>
          <dl>
            <dt id="corporate-social-network">Corporate social network analysis</dt>
            <dd>There is enormous value in mapping out the entities&#x2014;and <em>types</em> of entities&#x2014;present in a <dfn>business ecosystem</dfn>, as well as how they relate to each other. This includes partners, vendors, competitors, institutions, governments and regulatory bodies, their key people, their products, and so on.</dd>
            <dt id="bibliographic-records">Bibliographic records</dt>
            <dd>Organizations tend to reference a number of information resources in their projects, internal policy documents, and external communications. It is valuable not only to concentrate these and make them available to everybody on the team, but also link them back to the places from which they are referenced.</dd>
            <dt>Content strategy</dt>
            <dd>Organizations tend to produce a lot of content, both for internal consumption as well as communicating with customers, users, and the general public. This module will ease the process of creating content inventories for subsequent audits, as well as afford modeling audience segments to reconcile with existing and future content.</dd>
            <!-- <dt>Interaction design</dt> -->
            <dt>Plain-vanilla notes</dt>
            <dd><dfn>Personal knowledge management</dfn> software has demonstrated the value of being able to attach notes to anything, including other notes. As such, <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> will implement ordinary notes that you can attach to anything&#x2014;<em>including other notes</em>&#x2014;and effectively act as a note <em>server</em> for resources outside of <span about="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService" property="gr:name">Sense Atlas</span>.</dd>
          </dl>
          <p>While these modules are useful on their own, the real power is in putting them <em>together</em>. Furthermore, in principle, <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> can represent any mix of <dfn>linked data vocabularies</dfn>, either <a rel="dct:references" href="https://lov.linkeddata.es/" typeof="bibo:Website">off the shelf</a>, or <a rel="dct:references" href="https://vocab.methodandstructure.com/" typeof="bibo:Website">purpose-made</a>. Clients are invited to inquire about custom extensions and visualizations.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="who-benefits-from-sense-atlas">
          <h2>Who benefits from <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span>?</h2>
          <p><span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> was created initially to support the software development process. There is nothing, however, inherent to <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> that is specific to software development, only that software development tends to feature a large number of interacting concerns that requires a structure like <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> to faithfully represent.</p>
          <p>For example, anybody who undertakes complex projects can benefit from the planning modules, like:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>Architects</li>
            <li>Engineers</li>
            <li>Building contractors</li>
          </ul>
          <p>The <abbr>IBIS</abbr> module works just as well for policy analysis&#x2014;including contracts, treaties, and legislation&#x2014;as it does for design rationale. This makes it useful for:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>Lawyers</li>
            <li>Risk managers</li>
            <li>Think-tankers</li>
            <li>Unions</li>
            <li>Professional associations</li>
          </ul>
          <p>Forthcoming modules, such as the <a rel="ci:mentions" href="/#corporate-social-network">corporate social network</a> and <a rel="ci:mentions" href="/#bibliographic-records">bibliographic records</a> will be of particular interest to <em>journalists</em> and <em>academics</em>.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="what-does-sense-atlas-cost">
          <h2>How much does it cost?</h2>
          <p>For the duration of the private alpha period, <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> is <strong>free</strong>:</p>
          <ul>
            <li>for your team, with a consulting agreement,</li>
            <li>alternatively, both <a rel="ci:mentions" href="https://github.com/doriantaylor/sense-atlas-front-end"><span about="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService" property="gr:name">Sense Atlas</span></a> and its substrate <a rel="ci:mentions" href="https://github.com/doriantaylor/rb-intertwingler"><span about="urn:uuid:a50aee04-f8d2-4c75-a796-9cd0aaa95025" typeof="gr:ProductOrService" property="gr:name">Intertwingler</span></a> are <dfn>open-source</dfn>, but you're on your own with that.</li>
          </ul>
        </section>
        <section id="how-to-get-sense-atlas">
          <h2>How do I get it?</h2>
          <p><span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> is currently available at no extra charge to clients of <a href="https://methodandstructure.com/">Method &amp; Structure Consulting</a>, through a guided service to populate each team's individual <dfn>knowledge graph</dfn>, and train the team on its use. This private alpha program is slated to run for about a year while it undergoes development into a fully-fledged hosted software product. If you run a team and are interested in adding <dfn>organizational cartography</dfn> to your repertoire, <a href="mailto:consulting@methodandstructure.com?subject=Sense%20Atlas%20private%20alpha">by all means reach out</a>.</p>
          <figure>
            <big><a href="mailto:consulting@methodandstructure.com?subject=Sense%20Atlas%20private%20alpha">Let's talk. Click here to send an email.</a></big>
          </figure>
          <p>In addition to clients, we will be admitting a few individuals into the alpha program, although capacity for support will be limited. Do inquire if you are interested in participating.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="who-made-sense-atlas">
          <h2>Who made <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span>?</h2>
          <p><span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> is the work of <a rel="ci:mentions" href="https://doriantaylor.com/">Dorian Taylor</a>, of <a href="https://methodandstructure.com/">Method &amp; Structure Consulting</a>.</p>
        </section>
        <hr/>
        <section id="priorities-and-non-priorities">
          <h2>Development priorities and non-priorities</h2>
          <p><span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> is being actively developed concurrently with its substrate, <a href="https://intertwingler.net/">Intertwingler</a>, a novel application server designed to facilitate the creation of <dfn>knowledge graphs</dfn> and other <dfn>dense hypermedia</dfn> systems, of which <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> is an example.</p>
          <section>
            <h3>Priorities</h3>
            <p><span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> is brand-new software. Development priorities for the first year will be set in conjunction with the needs of the participants of the private alpha program. Notwithstanding, here are some themes where work is immediately planned:</p>
            <dl>
              <dt>Response time</dt>
              <dd><span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> is using a specific development technique, and running on top of <a href="https://intertwingler.net/">a novel application server</a>. It was important to first get it running <em>correctly</em>, without compromising certain architectural constraints. Now that it <em>works</em>, the focus can shift to speeding it up.</dd>
              <dt>Collections</dt>
              <dd>The collection pages&#x2014;concept schemes and issue networks&#x2014;are still extremely bare-bones, and are slated to get a proper glow-up.</dd>
              <dt>Global edit history</dt>
              <dd>Because <em>all</em> state data of <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> is fully addressable, it should be possible in principle to undo <em>any</em> change, all the way back to the first interaction. The plan is to implement a transaction history directly into the underlying database&#x2014;where it belongs&#x2014;and to do this soon.</dd>
              <dt>Attachments</dt>
              <dd>While <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> is not intended to serve as yet another file repository, it is obviously useful to see things like link previews, profile pictures, and other opaque data objects. These capabilities are all routed through the same infrastructure in the underlying application server as what handles the internal caching, already mentioned as another high-priority item.</dd>
              <dt>Integrations</dt>
              <dd><span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> recognizes that other applications and information services exist in the world, and that many of them are popular. We will be targeting a few essential integrations (conventional bug trackers, cloud storage services, etc.) during the private alpha, pending input from clients.</dd>
              <dt>Alternative visualizations</dt>
              <dd><span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> uses an innovative hyperbolic radial <a rel="ci:mentions" href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Layered_graph_drawing">Sugiyama layout</a> for its main visualization, which is under active development. We recognize, moreover, that there are situations where other visual representations are more appropriate.</dd>
              <dt>Accessibility</dt>
              <dd><span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> uses a colourful palette to delineate all the different entities and relationships. Marshalling the palette at <em>all</em> was a challenge, though plans are in place to create palettes that account for the different&#x2014;and mutually conflicting&#x2014;forms of colour blindness. Screen reader support is likewise planned, pending a strategy to coalesce accessibility metadata with existing embedded semantic metadata.</dd>
              <dt>Real-time collaboration</dt>
              <dd>Since <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> is ultimately a collaborative tool, support real-time updates to the <dfn>knowledge graph</dfn> state, so you can see when others on your team change something.</dd>
            </dl>
          </section>
          <section>
            <h3>Non-priorities</h3>
            <dl>
              <dt>Mobile interface</dt>
              <dd>A proper treatment for mobile is going to have to figure out how to cram a metric tonne of information onto a tiny screen. There is a lot of stuff flying around right now, and it's going to have to settle down a bit first before serious thought is given to mobile&#x2014;though serious thought <em>will</em> be given to mobile.</dd>
              <dt>Artificial intelligence</dt>
              <dd><span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> is a tool for supporting <em>your</em> intelligence. While <em>you</em> could easily pump out your instance data and do <abbr>AI</abbr> things to it, and while there may be certain applicability for <abbr>AI</abbr> in the future, there is currently very little <em>within</em> <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> for <abbr>AI</abbr> to do.</dd>
              <dt>Whizz-bang visual effects</dt>
              <dd>Cutesy animations are extraordinarily time-consuming to implement and will only be considered for the time being if they solve a more substantive problem in the interface.</dd>
              <dt>Server round-trips</dt>
              <dd>The prototype that preceded <span rel="ci:mentions" resource="urn:uuid:4a540602-8ccc-40a5-8bb3-927cf5486d65" typeof="gr:ProductOrService">Sense Atlas</span> was developed initially to test <a href="https://doriantaylor.com/rdf-kv">a lightweight protocol</a> for manipulating knowledge graph data using only ordinary <abbr>HTML</abbr> forms. While the interaction is not as smooth as client-side scripting affords, this keeps the number of moving parts down when both the data schema and the interface to display and control it are in flux. We can easily replace it with the slicker interaction as these concerns stiffen.</dd>
            </dl>
          </section>
        </section>
      </article>
    </main>
    <footer>
      <p>Copyright &#xa9; 2012-2025, <a href="https://methodandstructure.com/">Method &amp; Structure</a></p>
    </footer>
  </body>
</html>
